README.md, before:

# 🤖 Intelligent Git Commit Tool

An AI-powered command-line tool that automatically generates meaningful commit messages and manages project documentation using Large Language Models (LLMs) from multiple providers including OpenRouter, OpenAI, Anthropic, and Google Gemini.

## ✨ Features

### 🎯 Smart Commit Messages
- **AI-Generated**: Creates contextual, descriptive commit messages by analyzing your code changes
- **Conventional Commits**: Follows best practices with proper type prefixes (`feat:`, `fix:`, `docs:`, etc.)
- **Customizable**: Override generated messages or use different AI models

### 🔍 Interactive Staging
- **Hunk-by-Hunk**: Stage individual changes within files, similar to `git add -p`
- **Visual Diff**: Colored output showing additions, deletions, and context
- **Flexible Options**: Auto-stage all changes, select specific files, or choose individual hunks

### 📚 Documentation Management
- **Smart Analysis**: Automatically suggests documentation updates based on code changes
- **CRUD Operations**: Create, update, and manage documentation files
- **Simple Patch Format**: Uses an LLM-friendly patch system for precise updates
- **Multi-Format Support**: Works with Markdown, reStructuredText, and plain text files

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.7+
- Git repository
- OpenRouter API key ([Get one here](https://openrouter.ai/))

### Installation

1. **Clone or download the script**:
   ```bash
   wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/your-repo/git-commit-tool.py
   chmod +x git-commit-tool.py
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**:
   ```bash
   pip install requests
   ```

3. **Set up your API key**:
   ```bash
   export OPENROUTER_API_KEY="your-api-key-here"
   ```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Interactive mode - stage changes selectively
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --interactive

# Auto-commit all changes
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --auto-stage

# Manage documentation
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --docs-dir ./docs --docs-only
```

## 📖 Detailed Usage

### Command Line Options

| Option | Short | Description |
|--------|-------|-------------|
| `--api-key` | | **Required.** OpenRouter API key |
| `--model` | | AI model to use (default: `anthropic/claude-3-sonnet`) |
| `--interactive` | `-i` | Interactive hunk staging mode |
| `--auto-stage` | `-a` | Automatically stage all changes |
| `--docs-dir` | | Path to documentation directory |
| `--docs-only` | | Only perform documentation management |
| `--commit-message` | `-m` | Override generated commit message |

### Usage Examples

#### 1. Interactive Staging (Recommended)
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY -i
```

This mode lets you:
- Review each change individually
- Stage only the changes you want to commit
- Generate focused commit messages for specific changes

#### 2. Quick Commit All Changes
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY -a
```

Perfect for when you want to commit all your changes with an AI-generated message.

#### 3. Documentation Management
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --docs-dir ./docs --docs-only
```

The tool will:
- Analyze your recent changes
- Suggest documentation updates
- Help create or update documentation files
- Use a simple patch system for precise edits

#### 4. Custom Model
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --model "openai/gpt-4-turbo" -i
```

Supported models include:
- `anthropic/claude-3-sonnet` (default)
- `anthropic/claude-3-opus`
- `openai/gpt-4-turbo`
- `openai/gpt-3.5-turbo`
- And many more via OpenRouter

## 🛠️ How It Works

### Commit Message Generation

The tool analyzes your staged changes and generates commit messages following these principles:

- **Conventional Commits**: Uses standard prefixes (`feat:`, `fix:`, `docs:`, `refactor:`, etc.)
- **Imperative Mood**: "Add feature" not "Added feature"
- **Descriptive**: Explains what and why, not just what
- **Concise**: First line under 50 characters

Example generated messages:
```
feat(auth): add OAuth2 login support
fix(api): handle null response in user endpoint
docs: update installation instructions for Docker
refactor: simplify database connection logic
```

### Interactive Staging

When you use `--interactive`, the tool:

1. **Parses Diffs**: Breaks down file changes into individual "hunks"
2. **Shows Previews**: Displays colored diffs for each change
3. **Prompts for Action**: Ask whether to stage each hunk
4. **Applies Changes**: Uses `git apply --cached` to stage selected hunks

### Documentation Updates

The documentation system:

1. **Analyzes Context**: Reviews recent commits, modified files, and project structure
2. **Suggests Changes**: Recommends documentation updates based on code changes
3. **Provides Templates**: Generates new documentation from scratch
4. **Applies Patches**: Uses a simple patch format for precise updates

#### Patch Format

The tool uses a simple, LLM-friendly patch format:

```
PATCH_START
SECTION: Installation
ACTION: REPLACE
CONTENT:
## Installation

1. Install Python 3.8+
2. Run: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
3. Set up your config file
PATCH_END
```

## 🎨 Interactive Mode Demo

```
📝 File: src/auth.py
==================================================

Hunk 1/3:
@@ -45,6 +45,12 @@ def authenticate(username, password):
     if not username or not password:
         return False
     
+    # Add rate limiting
+    if check_rate_limit(username):
+        raise RateLimitError("Too many attempts")
+    
     user = get_user(username)
     return verify_password(user, password)

Stage this hunk? [y/n/q/d]: y

🤖 Generating commit message...

📝 Proposed commit message:
--------------------------------------------------
feat(auth): add rate limiting to authentication

Prevents brute force attacks by limiting login attempts
per username. Raises RateLimitError when threshold exceeded.
--------------------------------------------------

Proceed with commit? [Y/n]: 
```

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

Set these for convenience:

```bash
export OPENROUTER_API_KEY="your-api-key"
export GIT_COMMIT_TOOL_MODEL="anthropic/claude-3-sonnet"
export GIT_COMMIT_TOOL_DOCS_DIR="./docs"
```

### Model Options

Popular models available through OpenRouter:

| Model | Best For | Context |Cost |
|-------|----------|------|------|
| `anthropic/claude-sonnet-4` (recommended) | Balanced performance | 200K | $$ |
| `anthropic/claude-opus-4` (best as of 6/10/25) | Highest quality | 200K | $$$$ |
| `google/gemini-2.5-pro-preview` | High quality | 1M | $$ |
| `google/gemini-2.5-flash-preview-05-20` | Fast, good quality | 1M | $ |
| `meta-llama/llama-4-maverick:free` | Free and capable | 128K | Free |


## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Here are some ways to help:

- **Bug Reports**: Found an issue? Please open an issue with details
- **Feature Requests**: Have an idea? We'd love to hear it
- **Code Contributions**: Submit pull requests for improvements
- **Documentation**: Help improve these docs

### Development Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/git-commit-tool.git
cd git-commit-tool

# Install dependencies
pip install requests

# Run tests (if you add them)
python -m pytest tests/
```

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **OpenRouter** for providing easy access to multiple LLM providers
- **Conventional Commits** for the commit message format specification
- **Git** for the amazing version control system that makes this all possible

## 🆘 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**"Not in a git repository"**
- Make sure you're running the tool from within a git repository
- Initialize a repo with `git init` if needed

**"LLM API call failed"**
- Check your API key is correct and has credits
- Verify network connectivity
- Try a different model

**"Failed to stage changes"**
- Ensure files aren't locked or in use by other processes
- Check git status for any conflicts

**"No changes staged for commit"**
- Make sure you have modified files
- Try `git status` to see what's changed
- Use `--auto-stage` to stage everything

### Getting Help

- **Issues**: Open an issue on GitHub
- **Discussions**: Use GitHub Discussions for questions
- **Documentation**: Check this README and inline help (`--help`)

Commit message:

Updates documentation for broader API support
Raises minimum Python version requirement to 3.11+ and expands supported API providers to include OpenAI, Anthropic, and Google Gemini in addition to OpenRouter.

Removes outdated model list section to avoid maintenance overhead as supported models change frequently across providers.

README.md, after:

# 🤖 Intelligent Git Commit Tool

An AI-powered command-line tool that automatically generates meaningful commit messages and manages project documentation using Large Language Models (LLMs) from multiple providers including OpenRouter, OpenAI, Anthropic, and Google Gemini.

## ✨ Features

### 🎯 Smart Commit Messages
- **AI-Generated**: Creates contextual, descriptive commit messages by analyzing your code changes
- **Conventional Commits**: Follows best practices with proper type prefixes (`feat:`, `fix:`, `docs:`, etc.)
- **Customizable**: Override generated messages or use different AI models

### 🔍 Interactive Staging
- **Hunk-by-Hunk**: Stage individual changes within files, similar to `git add -p`
- **Visual Diff**: Colored output showing additions, deletions, and context
- **Flexible Options**: Auto-stage all changes, select specific files, or choose individual hunks

### 📚 Documentation Management
- **Smart Analysis**: Automatically suggests documentation updates based on code changes
- **CRUD Operations**: Create, update, and manage documentation files
- **Simple Patch Format**: Uses an LLM-friendly patch system for precise updates
- **Multi-Format Support**: Works with Markdown, reStructuredText, and plain text files

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.11+
- Git repository
- API keys for OpenRouter, OpenAI, Anthropic, or Google Gemini

### Installation

1. **Clone or download the script**:
   ```bash
   wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/your-repo/git-commit-tool.py
   chmod +x git-commit-tool.py
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**:
   ```bash
   pip install requests
   ```

3. **Set up your API key**:
   ```bash
   export OPENROUTER_API_KEY="your-api-key-here"
   ```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Interactive mode - stage changes selectively
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --interactive

# Auto-commit all changes
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --auto-stage

# Manage documentation
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --docs-dir ./docs --docs-only
```

## 📖 Detailed Usage

### Command Line Options

| Option | Short | Description |
|--------|-------|-------------|
| `--api-key` | | **Required.** OpenRouter API key |
| `--model` | | AI model to use (default: `anthropic/claude-3-sonnet`) |
| `--interactive` | `-i` | Interactive hunk staging mode |
| `--auto-stage` | `-a` | Automatically stage all changes |
| `--docs-dir` | | Path to documentation directory |
| `--docs-only` | | Only perform documentation management |
| `--commit-message` | `-m` | Override generated commit message |

### Usage Examples

#### 1. Interactive Staging (Recommended)
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY -i
```

This mode lets you:
- Review each change individually
- Stage only the changes you want to commit
- Generate focused commit messages for specific changes

#### 2. Quick Commit All Changes
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY -a
```

Perfect for when you want to commit all your changes with an AI-generated message.

#### 3. Documentation Management
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --docs-dir ./docs --docs-only
```

The tool will:
- Analyze your recent changes
- Suggest documentation updates
- Help create or update documentation files
- Use a simple patch system for precise edits

#### 4. Custom Model
```bash
python git-commit-tool.py --api-key $OPENROUTER_API_KEY --model "openai/gpt-4-turbo" -i
```

## 🛠️ How It Works

### Commit Message Generation

The tool analyzes your staged changes and generates commit messages following these principles:

- **Conventional Commits**: Uses standard prefixes (`feat:`, `fix:`, `docs:`, `refactor:`, etc.)
- **Imperative Mood**: "Add feature" not "Added feature"
- **Descriptive**: Explains what and why, not just what
- **Concise**: First line under 50 characters

Example generated messages:
```
feat(auth): add OAuth2 login support
fix(api): handle null response in user endpoint
docs: update installation instructions for Docker
refactor: simplify database connection logic
```

### Interactive Staging

When you use `--interactive`, the tool:

1. **Parses Diffs**: Breaks down file changes into individual "hunks"
2. **Shows Previews**: Displays colored diffs for each change
3. **Prompts for Action**: Ask whether to stage each hunk
4. **Applies Changes**: Uses `git apply --cached` to stage selected hunks

### Documentation Updates

The documentation system:

1. **Analyzes Context**: Reviews recent commits, modified files, and project structure
2. **Suggests Changes**: Recommends documentation updates based on code changes
3. **Provides Templates**: Generates new documentation from scratch
4. **Applies Patches**: Uses a simple patch format for precise updates

#### Patch Format

The tool uses a simple, LLM-friendly patch format:

```
PATCH_START
SECTION: Installation
ACTION: REPLACE
CONTENT:
## Installation

1. Install Python 3.8+
2. Run: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
3. Set up your config file
PATCH_END
```

## 🎨 Interactive Mode Demo

```
📝 File: src/auth.py
==================================================

Hunk 1/3:
@@ -45,6 +45,12 @@ def authenticate(username, password):
     if not username or not password:
         return False
     
+    # Add rate limiting
+    if check_rate_limit(username):
+        raise RateLimitError("Too many attempts")
+    
     user = get_user(username)
     return verify_password(user, password)

Stage this hunk? [y/n/q/d]: y

🤖 Generating commit message...

📝 Proposed commit message:
--------------------------------------------------
feat(auth): add rate limiting to authentication

Prevents brute force attacks by limiting login attempts
per username. Raises RateLimitError when threshold exceeded.
--------------------------------------------------

Proceed with commit? [Y/n]: 
```

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

Set these for convenience:

```bash
export OPENROUTER_API_KEY="your-api-key"
export GIT_COMMIT_TOOL_MODEL="anthropic/claude-3-sonnet"
export GIT_COMMIT_TOOL_DOCS_DIR="./docs"
```

### Model Options

Popular models available through OpenRouter:

| Model | Best For | Context |Cost |
|-------|----------|------|------|
| `anthropic/claude-sonnet-4` (recommended) | Balanced performance | 200K | $$ |
| `anthropic/claude-opus-4` (best as of 6/10/25) | Highest quality | 200K | $$$$ |
| `google/gemini-2.5-pro-preview` | High quality | 1M | $$ |
| `google/gemini-2.5-flash-preview-05-20` | Fast, good quality | 1M | $ |
| `meta-llama/llama-4-maverick:free` | Free and capable | 128K | Free |


## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Here are some ways to help:

- **Bug Reports**: Found an issue? Please open an issue with details
- **Feature Requests**: Have an idea? We'd love to hear it
- **Code Contributions**: Submit pull requests for improvements
- **Documentation**: Help improve these docs

### Development Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/git-commit-tool.git
cd git-commit-tool

# Install dependencies
pip install requests

# Run tests (if you add them)
python -m pytest tests/
```

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **OpenRouter** for providing easy access to multiple LLM providers
- **Conventional Commits** for the commit message format specification
- **Git** for the amazing version control system that makes this all possible

## 🆘 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**"Not in a git repository"**
- Make sure you're running the tool from within a git repository
- Initialize a repo with `git init` if needed

**"LLM API call failed"**
- Check your API key is correct and has credits
- Verify network connectivity
- Try a different model

**"Failed to stage changes"**
- Ensure files aren't locked or in use by other processes
- Check git status for any conflicts

**"No changes staged for commit"**
- Make sure you have modified files
- Try `git status` to see what's changed
- Use `--auto-stage` to stage everything

### Getting Help

- **Issues**: Open an issue on GitHub
- **Discussions**: Use GitHub Discussions for questions
- **Documentation**: Check this README and inline help (`--help`)
